---
date: '2017-10-07T16:32:41+09:00'
tags: [ 'en', 'flor', 'ruby', 'workflow' ]
---

## flor design

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-align="right" data-width="350" data-conversation="none" data-lang="en" data-theme="dark"><p lang="fr" dir="ltr"><a href="https://twitter.com/jmettraux?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@jmettraux</a> est-ce qu&#39;on pourra avoir un jour un article de blog sur le design de ruote/flor ? :) Je n&#39;ai jamais rien vu d&#39;équivalent.</p>&mdash; Benjamin Dauvergne (@b_dauvergne) <a href="https://twitter.com/b_dauvergne/status/915872140020404224?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">October 5, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

I was approached on Twitter by [Benjamin Dauvergne](https://twitter.com/b_dauvergne), he asked: "Will we some day have a blog post about the design of ruote/flor? :)".

He then expanded to "Or pointers about inspiration, I have trouble understanding the expression/message executor, it looks like a [tuplespace/whiteboard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tuple_space) design".

I pointed at [flor's nascent documentation](https://github.com/floraison/flor/tree/master/doc), but, well, that isn't a blog post, it's an index, not a gate.

Let me try to answer.

Benjamin, please ask any further question you have directly to me on Twitter, like you did. I'll do my best to answer, possibly in a further blog post.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-align="right" data-width="350" data-conversation="none" data-lang="en" data-theme="dark"><p lang="fr" dir="ltr">Ou des pointeurs sur l&#39;inspiration, j&#39;ai toujours du mal avec l&#39;exécuteur d&#39;expressions/message, on dirait un design tuplespace/whiteboard.</p>&mdash; Benjamin Dauvergne (@b_dauvergne) <a href="https://twitter.com/b_dauvergne/status/915872387073224705?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">October 5, 2017</a></blockquote>

### workflow engine design

Ruote and flor were/are meant to be workflow engines. Workflow as in decomposition of a work into a set of tasks sequential and or concurrent. Engine because they are meant to give an impetus to the flow.

Maybe workflow "driver" would be better. Flor reads an itinerary called a workflow definition and drives according to it.

### ruote design

Ruote is the descendant of a dead workflow engine written in Java and called OpenWFE.

Here is a sample process definition for that Java workflow engine, yes, it's XML:
<pre><code class="xml">&lt;sequence>
  &lt;participant name="alice" task="do this" />
  &lt;concurrence>
    &lt;participant name="bob" task="do that" />
    &lt;participant name="charly" task="do this again" />
  &lt;concurrence>
&lt;sequence>
</code></pre>

Ruote could read that original format, and after a few iterations, it could read a Ruby DSL (or internal DSL) in which, the above could be written as:

<pre><code class="ruby">sequence do
  participant 'name' => 'alice', 'task' => 'do this'
  concurrence do
    participant 'name' => 'bob', 'task' => 'do that'
    participant 'name' => 'charly', 'task' => 'do this again'
  end
end
</code></pre>

XML is wonderful, but is it a good support for a would-be scripting language?

Ruby being a fertile ground for inner DSLs, when moving to Ruby, after a few iterations, I built a DSL for Ruote, as seen just above. But the one-to-one mapping XML node was preserved. Ruote called those nodes "expressions" and the storage mechanisms were expressions-oriented. 1 change to 1 node, 1 write.

The late iterations of ruote contained a third attempt at a process definition language, backed by a parser (not an internal DSLs), but it was still limited by the legacy of the two initial languages.

### flor design

Ruote was breaking for three reasons.

First reason, there were too many adapters to maintain,
<br/>Second reason, the adapters were too difficult to maintain, the concurrence model was too ambitious, and was a huge source of bugs and maintenance time,
<br/>Third reason, the process definition language was too weak, a real scripting language is, in my opinion, necessary.

The move to flor (via [flon](https://github.com/flon-io)) brought two big changes for the storage mechanism. One, the storage is now execution-oriented, not expression-oriented. The executor saves all the nodes in the execution at once. Two, there is only one storage mechanism, flor relies on [Sequel](http://sequel.jeremyevans.net/).

Flor (and flon) brought their own language and the parser for it. The flow above is thus written:
<pre><code class="python">sequence
  task 'alice' with: 'do this'
  concurrence
    task 'bob' with: 'do that'
    task 'charly' with: 'do this again'
</code></pre>

Flor hasn't got half a dozen adapters, it assumes the storage is behind a [Sequel](http://sequel.jeremyevans.net/) dataset. That's another way to focus, less to maintain for me.

Let me introduce a few flor terms.

<style>
  table.glossary {
    border: lightgrey solid thin;
    border-collapse: collapse;
  }
  table.glossary td {
    border: lightgrey solid thin;
    padding: 0.1em 0.3em;
  }
  table.glossary td:first-of-type {
    width: 9em;
  }
</style>
  <table class="glossary">
  <tr><td><strong>definition</strong></td>
    <td>a process definition, ready for execution</td></tr>
  <tr><td><strong>message</strong></td>
    <td>a flor executor enacts an execution message by message, the most common message is "execute", followed by "receive", there are also "cancel", "terminated", ...</td></tr>
  <tr><td><strong>execution</strong></td>
    <td>the execution of a definition, a process instance</td></tr>
  <tr><td><strong>execution session</strong></td>
    <td> a segment of an execution timeline</td></tr>
  <tr><td><strong>scheduler</strong></td>
    <td>the flor server, tied to a Sequel dataset, instantiates executors when messages come for an execution</td></tr>
  <tr><td><strong>executor</strong></td>
    <td>instantiated to handle 1 or more message and enact a single execution session</td></tr>
  <tr><td><strong>task</strong></td>
    <td>A piece of work (a work item) emitted by flor</td></tr>
  <tr><td><strong>tasker</strong></td>
    <td>a piece of Ruby code entrusted with a task</td></tr>
</table>

### launching a flor execution

The simplest way to launch a flor execution is to place a "launch" message in the "flor_messages" table for a flor scheduler.

The scheduler will pick up the message, instantiate an executor for that new execution session and hand it the launch message.

The executor will execute as much messages for this execution as possible. You may ask, why "as much"? Well, the launch message will generate further "execute" messages and the interpreter will execute them all, each time creating a new node for each of the "execute" message.

Looking at:
<pre><code class="python">sequence
  task 'alice' with: 'do this'
  concurrence
    task 'bob' with: 'do that'
    task 'charly' with: 'do this again'
</code></pre>
The executor will create a node for the sequence and one for alice's task. The execution session will then stop as the executor sends a "task" message to the tasker behind "alice". Since there is no further messages, the executor will save the execution with its two nodes and close the execution session. The executor instance ends.

When our flow reaches "alice", it hands a task to alice via whatever tasker stands behind that identifier (a "ganger" component decides what tasker in its "gang" will handle the task). With the "sequence" node and the "task" node in the execution, the executor will then cease its work.

When the answer from whatever stands behind "alice" comes, the scheduler instantiates a new executor to handle that "return" message. Following the definition above, the task node will get discarded upon receiving the "reply" message emitted by the tasker but right before will emit another "reply" message towards the sequence node. The sequence procedure determines that the next step is the concurrence and thus hands an "execute" message for the concurrence to the executor...

A flor execution session is a ballet of "execute" and "reply" messages closing upon "task" messages. It opens again when the "return" message comes. "signal" messages and especially "cancel" messages may come in and break the flow or make it take special turns.

Flor as an interpreter might not be very fast (especially as an interpreter built on Ruby), but its main goal is to achieve consistency for its executions. Those executions are not ephemeral, they have to outlive the scheduler and they definitely outlive the executors, session by session.

Whereas ruote was trying to go atomically, expression by expression (node by node in flor-speak), flor goes session by session. The messages inside of a session are not persisted to the Sequel dataset, only the launch message (giving birth to the execution) and the return, signal, cancel and other "off" messages. A flor executor only saves executions in consistent states (whereas ruote was striving to save expressions).

This early flor implementation only

<script type="text/javascript" src="https://asciinema.org/a/uiHKBb1Y4ang7X8izZSLTdP52.js" id="asciicast-uiHKBb1Y4ang7X8izZSLTdP52" async></script>

